chore(memory): promote strong-fit contacts drafts for review (#132)
medic/cht-agent: agent-memory/domains/contacts/issues/10057-feat10038-add-placequalifier-and-related-methods.md

## Solution

Added a PlaceQualifier type/interface and related methods (construction plus validation/type-guard helpers) to qualifier.ts, following the library's existing qualifier conventions. Landed as a WIP step toward issue #10038.

Subsequent PRs completed the place-creation feature:
- Implemented `createPlace` in the local place module (`v1.createPlace` curried over the LocalDataContext, writing through the medic DB service) (PR #10065).
- Added `createPlace` to the public place module (`src/place.ts`) with matching local and remote adapter implementations, exported via `src/index.ts`, input validation in `src/libs/parameter-validators.ts`, and a new `api/src/controllers/place.js` controller registered in `api/src/routing.js`, built on prerequisite PR #10065 (PR #10089).
- Extended the local place input qualifier to validate the `parent` field so places cannot be qualified without a valid parent reference (PR #10108).

> - On create, fetch the referenced parent contact and check its `contact_type` against the parent types the new contact's own type permits — that allow-list is the `parents` array on the contact-type config in app settings, read through `shared-libs/contact-types-utils`, not a field of the datasource. The `parent`/`contact` field is then stored as a dehydrated/minified nested lineage object (`{_id, parent: {_id, parent: ...}}`) instead of a bare string. The fetch, the check and the shaping are centralized in `src/input.ts` — a file PR #10124 adds, so none of this is present at this draft's own anchor — and reused by local person/place/report creation (place/report `contact` storage needs no parent-type validation) (PR #10124).

Reviewer: issue (blocking): This misplaces PR #10124's core logic and miscredits the file. `src/input.ts` never contained the parent fetch, the contact_type check, or the lineage shaping, and #10124 did not add the file.

What the history shows:
- `input.ts` was added by PR #10094 (commit 806456120, 2025-06-27) and at that point held only input-shape validation (`validateContactInput`, `validateReportInput`, reported_date format checks).
- PR #10124's entire diff to `input.ts` is +6/-1 (`git diff 95153376d^1 95153376d -- shared-libs/cht-datasource/src/input.ts`): it adds `contact: string` to `ReportInput` and a required-contact check.
- In #10124 the parent fetch, contact_type-vs-allowed-parents check, and dehydrated-lineage construction are module-local helpers duplicated per file: `ensureHasValidParentFieldAndReturnParentDoc`/`validatePersonParent`/`appendParent` in `local/person.ts`, a separate copy of `ensureHasValidParentFieldAndReturnParentDoc` plus `validateParentPresence`/`appendParent`/`appendContact` in `local/place.ts`, and `appendContact` in `local/report.ts`. Nothing is centralized or reused across modules at that point.
- Centralization came later on the feature branch (PR #10308, PR #10522): the logic moved into `local/libs/lineage.ts` (`assertHasValidParentType`, `minifyLineage`) and `local/libs/doc.ts` (`getDocsByIds`), and `input.ts` was reduced to types only before the branch squash-merged to master as PR #10083.

Suggested rewrite for lines 75 and 83: attribute the fetch/check/shaping to per-module helpers in `local/person.ts`, `local/place.ts`, and `local/report.ts` (duplicated in #10124, centralized into `local/libs/lineage.ts` by later feature-branch refactors). For line 110, change the attribution to `shared-libs/cht-datasource/src/input.ts (added in PR #10094, touched by PR #10124)`. The existing caveat that none of this exists at the draft's own anchor (e0ecefed4) is correct and can stay.

> `contacts` is still the closest fit, which is what the Domain Rationale below argues —
> the two statements are about different taxonomies, not in conflict. It stays in
> `contacts` until the new one lands — `data-access` is not yet a valid `domain` value in
> `agent-memory/schema.json` (PR #152 adds it and is unmerged), and relocating a draft
> before #135 adds union selection would drop it from `contacts` retrieval entirely.
> Re-key to `domain: data-access` + `secondaryDomains: [contacts]` in that coordinated pass.

> **Drift note (verified 2026-08-17).** None of this draft's five source PRs is an ancestor of
> `origin/master`; the work reached master only through the epic squash #10083 (`f382785be`,
> 2026-03-10), after a rename pass. On master `PlaceQualifier`, `byPlaceQualifier` and
> `isPlaceQualifier` no longer exist anywhere in the tree — they were replaced by `PlaceInput`
> in `src/input.ts` (#10094) — `v1.createPlace` is now `v1.create`, master's `src/input.ts` is
> types-only (zero runtime declarations), and the create-time parent-fetch /
> contact_type-check / lineage-shaping logic lives in `src/local/libs/lineage.ts`

> > on master, as `assertHasValidParentType` and `minifyDoc` — both master-only.

Reviewer: **issue (blocking):** The drift note relocates the create-time parent fetch into
`src/local/libs/lineage.ts`. On origin/master that file holds the shared `contact_type` check
(`assertHasValidParentType`, `:296`) and the minifier (`minifyDoc`, `:203`) and nothing that fetches a
parent. The fetch lives in the entity modules: `getDocById(medicDb)` in `src/local/person.ts:126` and
`getDocsByIds(medicDb)` in `src/local/place.ts:165`, both imported from `./libs/doc`. This PR's own
9835 draft states it correctly, so the corpus currently disagrees with itself.

```suggestion
> types-only (zero runtime declarations); on master the contact_type check and the
> lineage shaping are the shared `assertHasValidParentType` and `minifyDoc` in
> `src/local/libs/lineage.ts`, while the parent fetch itself stays in the entity
> modules — `getDocById(medicDb)` in `src/local/person.ts` and `getDocsByIds(medicDb)`
> in `src/local/place.ts`, both from `./libs/doc`. All of these are master-only.
```

> `contacts` until the new one lands — `data-access` is not yet a valid `domain` value in
> `agent-memory/schema.json` (PR #152 adds it and is unmerged), and relocating a draft
> before #135 adds union selection would drop it from `contacts` retrieval entirely.
> Re-key to `domain: data-access` + `secondaryDomains: [contacts]` in that coordinated pass.

> **Drift note (verified 2026-08-20).** None of this draft's five source PRs is an ancestor of
> `origin/master`; the work reached master only through the epic squash #10083 (`f382785be`,
> 2026-03-10), after a rename pass. On master `PlaceQualifier`, `byPlaceQualifier` and
> `isPlaceQualifier` no longer exist anywhere in the tree — they were replaced by `PlaceInput`
> in `src/input.ts` (#10094) — `v1.createPlace` is now `v1.create`, master's `src/input.ts` is
> types-only (zero runtime declarations); on master the contact_type check and the
> lineage shaping are the shared `assertHasValidParentType` and `minifyDoc` in
> `src/local/libs/lineage.ts`, while the parent fetch itself stays in the entity
> modules — `getDocById(medicDb)` in `src/local/person.ts` and `getDocsByIds(medicDb)`

> > in `src/local/place.ts`, both from `./libs/doc`. All of these are master-only.

Reviewer: **suggestion (non-blocking):** "All of these" includes the two fetch helpers. They are not
master-only. `getDocById(medicDb)` exists at the anchor `e0ecefed` in `local/person.ts:41` and
`local/place.ts:35`. `getDocsByIds` exists there in `local/libs/doc.ts:19`. Two things are new on
master: the use of these helpers in the `create` paths, and the two lineage helpers.

```suggestion
> in `src/local/place.ts`, both from `./libs/doc`. The two lineage helpers are master-only; the `./libs/doc` fetchers already exist at the anchor, only their use in the `create` paths is new.
```
